vi 
 
 
Methodology for Data Collection & Publication 
A) Data Collection and Compilation Process 
Crime in India – 2022 deals with the crime data which refers to the calendar year (1st 
January to 31st December of 2022). The data collection process including clarifications from 
the States/UTs/Central Agencies started in Jan, 2023 and continued till June, 2023. 
 
a) State/UT Police: 
i. 
The annual State/UT data for “Crime in India” is furnished by the 36 States/UTs in the 
NCRB prescribed proformae through a software application developed by NCRB. 
ii. 
Similar data is also furnished for 53 Metropolitan Cities by respective SCRBs /CIDs (i.e. 
Metropolitan Cities which have the population of 1 million (10 lakh) or more as per 
Population Census, 2011). However, data pertaining to only 19 Metropolitan Cities with 
population more than 2 million (20 lakhs) is being published in hard copy. The data for 
remaining 34 Metropolitan Cities would, however, be available on NCRB Website.  
iii. 
Delhi UT comprises of both Delhi City and rural part of Delhi. 
iv. 
The data is entered by State/UT Police at Police Station/District level. 
v. 
A training is conducted every year for the functional officials (Police constables, HCs, 
ASIs, SIs, etc. from all States/UTs) to explain the various issues concerning entry of data 
in input tables. 
vi. 
The consolidation of District/State level data is done by State Police Agencies (SCRB/ 
CID). 
vii. 
First level data validation is done at the Police Station/District level during the data 
capturing process itself and Second level data validation is done at the state level at the 
time of consolidation of District data through the NCRB application.  
viii. 
Data is scrutinized at NCRB for discrepancy / inconsistency. The same, if any, are 
communicated to the respective State/UT for verification. 
ix. 
Amendments/Rectifications, if any, in the data are incorporated in the database by 
NCRB. 
 
b)  Central Law Enforcement Agencies/CAPFs: 
Details of seizures and prosecutions under Prevention of Corruption Act, Direct Taxes 
Enactments, Customs Act, NDPS Act, etc. as being furnished by CAPFs (Assam Riffles, 
Border Security Force, Central Industrial Security Force, Central Reserve Police Force, 
Indo Tibetan Border Police and Sashastra Seema Bal) and the respective Central Law 
Enforcement Agencies (viz. CBI, Central Board of Direct Taxes, DRI, Narcotics Control 
Bureau, NIA and Central Board of Indirect Taxes & Customs) have been published under  
Chapter 20C & Chapter 20D respectively. 
 
